SENECA - DE BREVITATE VITAE
Liber I, Caput I

Maior pars mortalium, Pauline, de naturae malignitate conqueritur, quod in exiguum aevi gignimur, quod haec tam velociter, tam rapide dati nobis temporis spatia decurrant, adeo ut exceptis admodum paucis ceteros in ipso vitae apparatu vita destituat. Nec huic publico, ut opinantur, malo turba tantum et imprudens vulgus ingemuit; clarorum quoque virorum hic affectus querellas evocavit.

Inde illa maximi medicorum exclamatio est: "vitam brevem esse, longam artem." Inde Aristotelis cum rerum natura exigentis minime conveniens sapienti viro lis: "aetatis illam animalibus tantum indulsisse, ut quina aut dena saecula educerent, homini in tam multa ac magna genito tanto citeriorem terminum stare."

Non exiguum temporis habemus, sed multum perdidimus. Satis longa vita et in maximarum rerum consummationem large data est, si tota bene collocaretur; sed ubi per luxum ac neglegentiam diffluit, ubi nulli bonae rei impenditur, ultima demum necessitate cogente, quam ire non intelleximus transisse sentimus.

Ita est: non accipimus brevem vitam sed fecimus, nec inopes eius sed prodigi sumus. Sicut amplae et regiae opes, ubi ad malum dominum pervenerunt, momento dissipantur, at quamvis modicae, si bono custodi traditae sunt, usu crescunt, ita aetas nostra bene disponenti multum patet.

---

TRANSLATION:

The majority of mortals, Paulinus, complain of the spitefulness of Nature, because we are born for a brief span of life, because even this space that has been granted to us rushes by so speedily and so swiftly that all save a very few find life at an end just when they are getting ready to live. Nor is it merely the common herd and the unthinking crowd that bemoan what is, as men deem it, a universal ill; the same feeling has called forth complaint also from men who were famous.

It was this that made the greatest of physicians exclaim that "life is short, art is long." It was this that led Aristotle, most unbecoming a wise man, to enter a protest against Nature—that to animals she is so indulgent that they live five or ten generations, but that to man, born for so many great achievements, she has granted so much shorter a limit.

We do not have a short time, but we have wasted much of it. Life is long enough, and it has been given in sufficiently generous measure to allow the accomplishment of the very greatest things if the whole of it is well invested. But when it is squandered through luxury and carelessness, when it is devoted to no good end, forced at last by the ultimate necessity we perceive that it has passed away before we were aware that it was passing.

So it is: the life we receive is not short but we make it so; we are not ill provided but use our means wastefully. Just as when ample and princely wealth falls to a bad owner it is squandered in a moment, but wealth however small, if entrusted to a good custodian, increases with use, so our lifetime extends amply if you manage it properly.
